.. _upgrade-v2:

#######################
Upgrading from v2 to v3
#######################

MathJax v3 is a complete rewrite of MathJax from the ground up (see
:ref:`whats-new-3.0`), and so its internal structure is quite
different from that of version 2.  That means MathJax v3 is **not** a
drop-in replacement for MathJax v2, and upgrading to version 3 takes
some adjustment to your web pages.  The sections below describe the
changes you will need to make, and the most important differences
between v2 and v3.

.. warning::

   If you are using the ``latest.js`` feature of MathJax v2 on a CDN,
   note that this will **not** update to version 3 automatically,
   since there are significant and potentially breaking changes in
   version 3.  There is, however, a bug in ``latest.js`` in versions
   2.7.5 and below; when the current version is 3.0 or higher,
   ``latest.js`` will not use the highest version of 2.x, but instead
   will use the version from which ``latest.js`` has been taken.  For
   example, if you load ``latest.js`` from version 2.7.3, it currently
   is giving you version 2.7.5 as the latest version, when version 3
   is released to the CDN, your pages will revert to using version
   2.7.3 again.  This behavior has been corrected in version 2.7.6, so
   if you change to loading ``latest.js`` from version 2.7.6, you
   should get the latest 2.x version regardless of the presence of
   version 3 on the CDN.

MathJax v3 is still a work in progress; not all features of version
2 have been converted to version 3 yet, and some may not be.  MathJax
v2 will continue to be maintained as we work to move more features
into version 3, but MathJax v2 likely will not see much further
development, just maintenance, once MathJax v3 is fully converted.

* :ref:`v2-configuration-changes`
* :ref:`v2-loading-changes`
* :ref:`v2-api-changes`
* :ref:`v2-jax-changes`
* :ref:`v2-not-available`
* :ref:`v2-not-ported`
* :ref:`v2-contextual-menu-changes`
* :ref:`v2-mathjax-node`
* :ref:`v2-compatibility-example`

-----

.. _v2-configuration-changes:

Configuration Changes
=====================

There are a number of changes in version 3 that affect how MathJax is
configured.  In version 2, there were several ways to provide
configuration for MathJax; in MathJax 3, when you are using
:ref:`MathJax components <web-components>`, there is now only one,
which is to set the :data:`MathJax` global to contain the
configuration information prior to loading MathJax.  In particular,
you no longer call :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Config()`, and this function does
not exist in MathJax v3.  See the section :ref:`configuration` for
more details on how to configure MathJax.

In addition to requiring the use of the :data:`MathJax` global
variable for setting the configuration, the organization of the
configuration options have been changed to accommodate the new
internal structure of MathJax, and some of their names have changed as
well.  To help you convert your existing version 2 configurations to
version 3, we provide a `conversion tool
<https://mathjax.github.io/MathJax-demos-web/convert-configuration/convert-configuration.html>`_
that you can use to obtain a version 3 configuration that is as close
as possible to your current one.

Not all configuration parameters can be converted directly, however.
For some of these, it is because the version 2 features have not yet
been ported to version 3, but for others, the version 2 feature may
simply not exist in the new architecture of version 3.  For example,
MathJax v2 updates the page in phases, first removing the math source
expressions (e.g., the TeX code), then inserts a preview expression
(fast to create, but not as accurately laid out), and then goes back
and produces high-quality typeset versions, which it inserts in chunks
between page updates.  MathJax version 3 does not work that way (it
does not change the page until the math is entirely typeset), and so
the options that control the math preview and the chunking of the
equations for display simply have no counterparts in version 3.

Finally, configurations that change the MathJax code via augmenting
the existing MathJax objects, or that hook into MathJax's processing
pipeline via :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Register.StartupHook()` or one of the
other hook mechanisms will not carry over to version 3.  MathJax v3
does not use the queues, signals, and callbacks that are central to
version 2, so code that relies on them will have to be updated.  See
the :ref:`web-configuration` section for some approaches to these
issues.

-----


.. _v2-loading-changes:

Changes in Loading MathJax
==========================

Just as there are changes in how MathJax is configured, there are also
changes in how MathJax is loaded.  With version 2, you load
``MathJax.js`` and indicate a combined configuration file using
``?config=`` followed by the name of the configuration file.  This
always required at least two files to be loaded (and often more than
that), and the second file was always loaded asynchronously, meaning
MathJax always operated asynchronously.

In version 3, there is no longer a ``MathJax.js`` file, and you load a
combined component file directly.  E.g., you load ``tex-chtml.js`` to
get TeX with CommonHTML output.  This reduces the number of files that
need to be requested, and improves performance.  See
:ref:`loading-mathjax` for more details.

Just as there is no need to use ``?config=`` in version 3, the other
parameters that could be set in this way also are absent from
version 3.  So, for example, you can't set ``delayStartupUntil`` in
the script that loads MathJax.

The startup sequence operates fundamentally differently in version 3
from how it did in version 2.  In version 2, MathJax would begin its
startup process immediately upon MathJax being loaded, queuing action
to perform configuration blocks, load extensions and jax, do the
initial typesetting, and so on.  It was difficult to insert your own
actions into this sequence, and timing issues could occur if you
didn't put your configuration in the right place.

In version 3, synchronization with MathJax is done through ES6
promises, rather than MathJax's queues and signals, and MathJax's
startup process is more straight-forward.  You can insert your own
code into the startup process more easily, and can replace the default
startup actions entirely, if you wish.  The actions Mathjax
takes during startup are better separated so that you can pick and
choose the ones you want to perform.  See the :ref:`startup-actions`
section for more details on how to accomplish this.

-----


.. _v2-api-changes:

Changes in the MathJax API
==========================

Because the internals have been completely redesigned, its :ref:`API
<api>` has changed, and so if you have been calling MathJax functions,
or have modified MathJax internals by augmenting the existing MathJax
objects, that code will no longer work with version 3, and will have
to be modified.  Some of the more important changes are discussed
below.

* The :meth:`Mathjax.Hub.Typeset()` function has been replaced by the
  :meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()` and :meth:`MathJax.typeset()`
  functions.  In fact, the :attr:`MathJax.Hub` has been removed
  entirely.

..

* The queues, signals, and callbacks that are central to version 2
  have been replaced by ES6 promises in version 3.  In particular, you
  can use :attr:`MathJax.startup.promise` as a replacement for
  :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Queue()`.  See the :ref:`typeset-async` section
  for how this is done.  See the :ref:`v2-compatibility-example` below
  for code that may make it possible for you to use your version 2
  code in version 3.

..

* The :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Register.StartupHook()` and other related
  hooks have been replaced by ``ready()`` functions in the
  :ref:`loader-component` component.  So code that relies on these
  hooks to alter MathJax need to be reworked.  The
  :ref:`startup-actions` section shows some mechanisms that can be
  used for this.

..

* Version 2 configurations could include an :meth:`Augment` block that
  could be used to add (or override) methods and data in the main
  MathJax objects.  In version 3, this should be handled through
  subclassing the MathJax object classes, and passing the new classes
  to the objects that use them.  This can be done during the `startup`
  component's ``ready()`` function, when the MathJax classes are
  available, but before any of their instances have been created.  See
  the :ref:`startup-actions` section for some ideas on how this can be
  done.

..

* The ``Augment`` configuration blocks and :meth:`StartupHooks()`
  function described above could be used in version 2 to extend
  MathJax's capabilities, and in particular, to extend the TeX input
  jax by adding new javascript-based macros.  These version-2
  mechanisms are not available in version 3; instead, TeX extensions
  are more formalized in version 3.  See the :ref:`custom-component`
  section for an example of how this can be done.

..

.. _math-script-example:

* In version 2, the mathematics that is located by MathJax is removed
  from the page and stored in special ``<script>`` tags within the
  page.  These are not visible to the reader, but mark the location
  and content of the math on the page.  It was possible in version 2
  for programs to create these ``<script>`` tags themselves, avoiding
  the need for MathJax to look for math delimiters, and for the page
  author to encode HTML special characters like ``<``, ``>``, and
  ``&`` in their mathematics.  Version 3 does not alter the document
  in this way, and does not store the math that it locates in tags in
  the page.  Instead, it keeps an external list of math objects (of the
  ``MathItem`` class).  So if you wish to use such scripts to store
  the math in the page initially, you can replace the ``find`` action
  in the :ref:`renderActions <document-renderActions>` list to use a
  function that locates the scripts and creates the needed
  ``MathItem`` objects.  For example

  .. code-block:: javascript

     MathJax = {
       options: {
         renderActions: {
           find: [10, function (doc) {
             for (const node of document.querySelectorAll('script[type^="math/tex"]')) {
               const display = !!node.type.match(/; *mode=display/);
               const math = new doc.options.MathItem(node.textContent, doc.inputJax[0], display);
               const text = document.createTextNode('');
               node.parentNode.replaceChild(text, node);
               math.start = {node: text, delim: '', n: 0};
               math.end = {node: text, delim: '', n: 0};
               doc.math.push(math);
             }
           }, '']
         }
       }
     };

  should find the scripts that MathJax version 2 normally would have
  created.

  Note that this will *replace* the standard ``find`` action that
  looks for math delimiters with this one that looks for the MathJax
  v2 script tags instead.  If you want to do *both* the original
  delimiter search *and* the search for script tags, then change the
  ``find:`` above to ``findScript:`` so that it doesn't replace the
  default ``find`` action.  That way, both actions will occur.

-----


.. _v2-jax-changes:

Changes in Input and Output Jax
===============================

The input and output processors (called "jax") are core pieces of
MathJax.  All three input processors from version 2 are present in
version 3, but the :ref:`AsciiMath <asciimath-support>` processor has
not been fully ported to version 3, and currently consists of the
legacy version 2 code patched onto the version 3 framework.  This is
larger and less efficient than a full version 3 port, which should be
included in a future release.

In version 2, MathJax used preprocessors (`tex2jax`, `mml2jax`,
`asciimath2jax`, and `jsMath2jax`) to locate the mathematics in the
page and prepare it for the input jax.  There was really no need to
have these be separate pieces, so in version 3, these have been folded
into their respective input jax.  That means that you don't load them
separately, and the configuration options of the preprocessor and
input jax have been combined.  For example, the ``tex2jax`` and
``TeX`` options now both occur in the ``tex`` configuration block.

MathJax version 2 included six different output jax, which had been
developed over time to serve different purposes.  The original
HTML-CSS output jax had the greatest browser coverage, but its output
was browser-dependent, its font detection was fragile, and it was the
slowest of the output processors.  The CommonHTML output jax was a
more modern remake of the HTML output that was both browser
independent, and considerably faster.  The SVG output jax produced SVG
images rather than HTML DOM trees, and did not require web fonts in
order to display the math, so the results could be made
self-contained.  MathJax version 3 includes the CommonHTML and SVG
output jax, but has dropped the older, slower HTML-CSS output format.

MathJax 2 also included an output format that produced MathML for
those browsers that support it.  Since only Firefox and Safari
currently implement MathML rendering (with no support in IE, Edge, or
Chrome), and because MathJax can't control the quality or coverage of
the MathML support in the browser, MathJax version 3 has dropped the
NativeMML output format for now.  Should the browser situation improve
in the future, it could be added again.  See :ref:`mathml-output` for
more on this, and for an example of how to implement MathML output
yourself.

There are few changes within the supported input and output jax, as
described below:

Input Changes
-------------

There are two changes in the TeX input jax that can affect backward
compatibility with existing TeX content in your pages.

The first concerns the ``\color`` macro; in version 2, ``\color`` is a
non-standard in that it takes two arguments (the color an the math to
be shown in that color), while the authentic LaTeX version is a switch
that changes the color of everything that follows it.  The
LaTeX-compatible one was available as an extension.  In version 3,
both versions are extensions (see ), with the LaTeX-compatible one
being autoloaded when ``\color`` is first used.  See the
:ref:`tex-color` and :ref:`tex-colorv2` extensions for more
information, and how to configure MathJax to use the original
version-2 ``\color`` macro.

The other incompatibility is that the names of some extensions have
been changed in version 3.  For example, `AMScd` in version 2 is now
`amscd` in version 3.  This means that you need to use
``\require{amscd}`` rather than ``\require{AMScd}`` to load the `CD`
environment.  In order to support existing content that uses
``\require``, you can use the code in the
:ref:`v2-compatibility-example` section below.

Some other changes include:

* The `autoload-all` extension has been rename `autoload`, and is more
  flexible and configurable than the original.

..

* There are two new extensions, :ref:`tex-braket` and
  :ref:`tex-physics`.

..

* The configuration options for controlling the format of equation
  numbers have been moved to an extension; see the
  :ref:`tex-tagformat` documentation for details.

..

* The ``useMathMLspacing`` options for the various input jax have been
  moved to the output jax instead, as the ``mathmlSpacing`` option.

..

* The ``processEscapes`` option for the `tex2jax` preprocessor (now
  for the TeX input jax) had a default value of ``false`` in version 2,
  but has default value ``true`` in version 3.

..

* The functionality of the `MathChoice` extension has been moved to
  the base TeX package.

..

* The non-standard ``UPDIAGONALARROW`` and ``ARROW`` notations have
  been removed from the ``menclose`` element.  These have been
  replaced by the standard ``northeastarrow`` notation.


Output Changes
--------------

There are several important changes to the output jax in version 3,
and several things that aren't yet implemented, but will be in a
future version.  One such feature is linebreaking, which hasn't been
ported to version 3 yet. Another is that only the MathJax TeX font is
currently available in version 3.  See :ref:`v2-not-ported` for a list of
features that are still being converted.

In addition, there a few other changes of importance:

* There are no more image fonts.  These were for use with the HTML-CSS
  output jax, and since that is not included in MathJax version 3,
  neither are the image fonts.  Since those took up a lot of disk
  space, this should make locally hosted MathJax installations smaller.

..

* For expressions with equation numbers, the SVG output jax now has
  these expressions float with the size of the container element, just
  like they do in HTML output.  This was not the case in version 2, so
  this is an important improvement for dynamic pages.

..

* The font used for characters that aren't in the font used by MathJax
  used to be controlled by the ``undefinedFont`` configuration
  parameter in version 2, but in version 3, you should use CSS to set
  this instead.  For example,

  .. code-block:: css

     mjx-container mjx-utext {
       font-family: my-favorite-font;
     }
     mjx-container svg text {
       font-family: my-favorite-font;
     }

  would select the ``my-favorite-font`` to be used for unknown
  characters.  The first declaration is for the CommonHTML output, and
  the second for the SVG output.  Once advantage of this approach is
  that you can specify the CSS separately for each variant; e.g.,

  .. code-block:: css

     mjx-container mjx-utext[variant="sans-serif"] {
       font-family: my-sans-serif-font;
     }
     mjx-container svg text[data-variant="sans-serif"] {
       font-family: my-sans-serif-font;
     }

  would set the font to use for characters that aren't in the MathJax
  fonts and that have requested the sans-serif variant.

..

* Version 3 only implements the CommonHTML and SVG output jax.  The
  original HTML-CSS output jax has been dropped, a has the NativeMML.
  The PreviewHTML and PlainSource output jax have not been ported to
  version 3, though they may be in the future, if there is interest.

-----

.. _v2-not-available:

No Longer Applies to Version 3
==============================

A number of version 2 features have been removed as part of the
redesign of MathJax version 3.  These are described below.

* In version 3, MathJax no longer updates the page in small "chunks",
  but instead updates the page as a whole (a future version may
  include an extension that updates in smaller pieces).  This has an
  impact on a number of version 2 features.  First, because there is
  no incremental update, the MathJax message bar (usually in the lower
  left corner) that indicated the progress of the typesetting is no
  longer needed, and is not part of MathJax version 3.  Of course, the
  configuration options that control it have also been removed, as
  have the options for equation chunking (that controlled how many
  equations to process between screen updates.

..

* Similarly, since the page updating is done all at once, there is no
  need for the math preview versions that were displayed while the
  equations where being typeset.  So the `fast-preview` extension and
  `PreviewHTML` output jax have been removed, along with the
  configuration options for them.

..

* The `PlainSource` output jax has not be ported to version 3, though
  it may be in the future; it can be handled in other ways in
  version 3.  As mentioned above, the `NativeMML` has been dropped
  from version 3, though it is not hard to :ref:`implement a
  replacement <NativeMML>` if you want.

..

* The `autobold` TeX extension is no longer available in version 3,
  and is unlikely to be ported in the future.

..

* The `mhchem` TeX extension in version 2 came in two forms:  the
  original extension that didn't match the LaTeX implementation
  perfectly, and a rewrite by the author of the original LaTeX package
  that made it compatible with LaTeX.  The legacy version could be
  selected by a configuration option.  This is no longer possible in
  version 3 (the legacy version is no longer provided).

..

* The `handle-floats` extension for HTML output has been removed, as
  its functionality is now part of the standard CommonHTML output.

..

* The `jsMath2jax` preprocessor has been dropped.  This was used to
  help bridge jsMath users to MathJax, but since it has been a decade
  since MathJax was introduced, the need for jsMath conversion should
  be very small at this point.

..

* The `MatchWebFonts` extension is no longer available.  This was
  sometimes needed for HTML-CSS output, which relied on the fonts
  being in place when it ran.  The CommonHTML output is less
  susceptible to font issues, and this is no longer necessary.

..

* The `FontWarnings` extension is no longer available, since it was
  for the HTML-CSS output jax, which is not part of MathJax
  version 3.

..

* The `HelpDialog` extension is not included in version 3.  Its
  functionality is incorporated into the :ref:`menu-component`
  directly.

..

* The `toMathML` extension is no longer provided in version 3.
  Instead, you can use :meth:`MathJax.startup.toMML()` if you are
  using MathJax components, or can use the ``SerializedMMLVisitor``
  object if you are calling MathJax modules directly.

..

* The configuration blocks no longer allow the ``style`` option that
  were available in version 2.  Instead, you should use CSS
  stylesheets and CSS style files directly.

..

* Synchronization with MathJax in version 2 was handled via queues,
  signals, and callbacks.  In version 3, these have been replaced by
  ES6 promises.  See :ref:`synchronization` for more details.

-----


.. _v2-not-ported:

Not Yet Ported to Version 3
===========================

As MathJax 3 is still a work in progress, not all of the version 2
features have been converted to the new code base yet, though we hope
to include them in version 3 in a future release.  Among the most
important ones are the following.

* Currently, automatic line breaking support is missing from
  version 3.  This is a key feature to be included in a future
  release.

..

* The MathJax v3 output jax currently only support one font, the
  MathJax TeX fonts.  Improved font support is an important goal for
  version 3, and this is one of the next features to be addressed.  We
  will be rebuilding the fonts used for MathJax, and making additional
  web fonts available in a future release.  We also plan to make the
  tools used for creating the necessary font data available for use in
  porting your own fonts for use with MathJax.

..

* The localization mechanism available in version 2 has not yet been
  incorporated into version 3, so currently MathJax v3 is available
  only in English.  This is an important feature that will be added to
  MathJax v3 in a future release.

..

* The `begingroup` and `mediawiki-texvc` TeX extensions haven't been
  ported to version 3 yet, but should be in the future.

..

* The `auto-collapse` assistive extension is not yet available for
  version 3.  If there is enough interest, that will also be ported to
  the new code base.


-----


.. _v2-contextual-menu-changes:

Contextual Menu Changes
=======================

The contextual menu has been reorganized to make it easier to access
some functions, and to add new ones.  One major new features is the
`Copy to Clipboard` submenu, which mirrors the `Show Math As` menu,
but sends the output to the clipboard rather than displaying it on
screen.  This is a feature that has been requested for a long time,
and we are pleased to be able to offer it in version 3.

There is also a new `Reset to defaults` item that resets all the saved
settings to their original values (effectively clearing any custom
settings).

The contextual menu now stores its data using the ``localStorage``
object in the browser, rather than using cookies like version 2 does.
This should be more efficient and more secure, but does mean older
browsers may not be able to save their settings from session to
session (if they don't support ``localStorage``).

The accessibility menu options are now built into the contextual menu,
so there is no longer an `accessibility-menu` extension.  They also
have been reorganized in the menu to make it easier to access the more
important features.  The `auto-collapse` extension has not yet been
ported to version 3, however.  The equation explorer has been expanded
and improved; see :ref:`accessibility` for details.

Finally, the ``showMathMenu`` and ``showMathMenuMSIE`` options have
been removed.  The need for separate handling of the menu in IE is no
longer applicable, and you control whether the contextual menu is
attached to the typeset mathematics using the ``enableMenu`` property
of the ``options`` block of the MathJax configuration (see
the :ref:`menu-options` documentation).

-----


.. _v2-mathjax-node:

MathJax in Node
===============

Version 2 of MathJax was designed to work in a browser, and relied
heavily on the presence of the browser window, document, DOM, and
other browser-specific objects.  Using MathJax on a server to
pre-process mathematics (e.g., to convert a TeX string to an SVG
image, for example), was not easy in version 2.  The `mathjax-node
<https://github.com/mathjax/mathjax-node>` project made that possible,
but required a completely different way of interacting with MathJax,
and was not as easy to use or as reliable as we would have liked.

Version 3 has server-side use as an important use-case to support, and
so it is possible to use MathJax in a `node` application in
essentially the same way as in a browser, with only a few minor
adjustments to the configuration to allow for that.  This should make
it much easier to use MathJax on a server, as it will work the same
there as for your web-based applications.  It is also possible to link
to MathJax at a lower level and access the MathJax modules directly.
See the section on :ref:`using MathJax in node <node-start>`, and the
:ref:`MathJax API <mathjax-api>` for more information on these
possibilities.

-----

.. _v2-compatibility-example:

Version 2 Compatibility Example
===============================

The following example causes the ``\color`` macro to be the original
one from version 2, and sets up the ``\require`` macro to translate
the old package names into the new ones.  This should make MathJax v3
handle existing content properly.

Be sure to convert your version-2 configuration to a version-3 one via
the `conversion tool
<https://mathjax.github.io/MathJax-demos-web/convert-configuration/convert-configuration.html>`__
that we provide.

.. code-block:: html

   <script>
   MathJax = {
     startup: {
       //
       //  Mapping of old extension names to new ones
       //
       requireMap: {
         AMSmath: 'ams',
         AMSsymbols: 'ams',
         AMScd: 'amscd',
         HTML: 'html',
         noErrors: 'noerrors',
         noUndefined: 'noundefined'
       },
       ready: function () {
         //
         //  Replace the require command map with a new one that checks for
         //    renamed extensions and converts them to the new names.
         //
         var CommandMap = MathJax._.input.tex.SymbolMap.CommandMap;
         var requireMap = MathJax.config.startup.requireMap;
         var RequireLoad = MathJax._.input.tex.require.RequireConfiguration.RequireLoad;
         var RequireMethods = {
           Require: function (parser, name) {
             var required = parser.GetArgument(name);
             if (required.match(/[^_a-zA-Z0-9]/) || required === '') {
               throw new TexError('BadPackageName', 'Argument for %1 is not a valid package name', name);
             }
             if (requireMap.hasOwnProperty(required)) {
               required = requireMap[required];
             }
             RequireLoad(parser, required);
           }
         };
         new CommandMap('require', {require: 'Require'}, RequireMethods);
         //
         //  Do the usual startup
         //
         return MathJax.startup.defaultReady();
       }
     },
     tex: {
       autoload: {
         color: [],          // don't autoload the color extension
         colorv2: ['color'], // do autoload the colorv2 extension
       }
     }
   };
   </script>
   <script id="MathJax-script" async
    src="https://cdn.jsdelivr.net/npm/mathjax@3/es5/tex-chtml.js"></script>

This uses the ``tex-chtml.js`` combined component, so change this to
whichever one you want.

If your website uses the MathJax API to queue typeset calls via

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.Hub.Queue(['Typeset', MathJax.Hub]);

for example, these calls will need to be converted to use the
:ref:`MathJax 3 API <api>`.  You may be able to use the following code
to patch into MathJax version 3, which provides implementations for
:meth:`MathJax.Hub.Typeset()`, and :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Queue()`.  It
also flags usages of :meth:`MathJax.Hub.Register.StartupHook()` and
the other hook-registering commands, and that you have converted your
:meth:`MathJax.Hub.Config()` and ``x-mathjax-config`` scripts to their
version 3 counterparts (use the `conversion tool <https://mathjax.github.io/MathJax-demos-web/convert-configuration/convert-configuration.html>`__).

Add the following lines right after the ``new CommandMap()`` call in
the code above:

.. code-block:: javascript

         //
         // Add a replacement for MathJax.Callback command
         //
         MathJax.Callback = function (args) {
           if (Array.isArray(args)) {
             if (args.length === 1 && typeof(args[0]) === 'function') {
               return args[0];
             } else if (typeof(args[0]) === 'string' && args[1] instanceof Object &&
                       typeof(args[1][args[0]]) === 'function') {
               return Function.bind.apply(args[1][args[0]], args.slice(1));
             } else if (typeof(args[0]) === 'function') {
               return Function.bind.apply(args[0], [window].concat(args.slice(1)));
             } else if (typeof(args[1]) === 'function') {
               return Function.bind.apply(args[1], [args[0]].concat(args.slice(2)));
             }
           } else if (typeof(args) === 'function') {
             return args;
           }
           throw Error("Can't make callback from given data");
         };
         //
         // Add a replacement for MathJax.Hub commands
         //
         MathJax.Hub = {
           Queue: function () {
             for (var i = 0, m = arguments.length; i < m; i++) {
                var fn = MathJax.Callback(arguments[i]);
                MathJax.startup.promise = MathJax.startup.promise.then(fn);
             }
             return MathJax.startup.promise;
           },
           Typeset: function (elements, callback) {
              var promise = MathJax.typesetPromise(elements);
              if (callback) {
                promise = promise.then(callback);
              }
              return promise;
           },
           Register: {
              MessageHook: function () {console.log('MessageHooks are not supported in version 3')},
              StartupHook: function () {console.log('StartupHooks are not supported in version 3')},
              LoadHook: function () {console.log('LoadHooks are not supported in version 3')}
           },
           Config: function () {console.log('MathJax configurations should be converted for version 3')}
         };
         //
         //  Warn about x-mathjax-config scripts
         //
         if (document.querySelector('script[type="text/x-mathjax-config"]')) {
           throw Error('x-mathjax-config scripts should be converted to MathJax global variable');
         }

With this you may be able to get away with using your existing version
2 code to interact with version 3.  But if not, either a more
sophisticated compatibility module will be needed, or better yet,
convert to the new version 3 API.

|-----|

