.. _web-typeset:

#######################
Typesetting Mathematics
#######################

There are two main uses for MathJax:

* Typesetting all the mathematics within a web page, and
* Converting a string containing mathematics into another form.

In version 2, MathJax could perform the first function very well, but
it was much harder to do the second.  The current version of MathJax
makes both easy to do.  Typesetting math is described below,
while converting math is described in the :ref:`next section
<convert-math>`.


.. _typeset-page:

Typesetting Math in a Web Page
==============================

MathJax makes it easy to typeset all the math in a web page, and in
fact it will do this automatically when it is first loaded unless you
configure it not to.  So this is one of the easiest actions to perform
in MathJax; if your page is static, there is nothing to do but load
MathJax.

If your page is dynamic, and you may be adding math after the page is
loaded, then you will need to tell MathJax to typeset the mathematics
once it has been inserted into the page.  There are two methods for
doing that: :js:meth:`MathJax.typeset()` and
:js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()`.

The first of these, :js:meth:`MathJax.typeset()`, typesets the page,
and does so immediately and synchronously, so when the call finishes,
the page will have been typeset.  Note, however, that if the math
includes actions that require additional files to be loaded (e.g., TeX
input that uses ``\require``, or that includes autoloaded extensions),
then a ``retry`` error will be thrown.  In that case, you should use
the :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()` instead, as described below.
This will make your typesetting asynchronous, however, and you may
need to take that into account in the rest of your code.  See also
:ref:`retry-error` section for more details.

.. warning::

   In MathJax v4, with the introduction of new fonts that include many
   more characters than the original MathJax TeX fonts did, the fonts
   have been broken into smaller pieces so that your readers don't
   have to download the entire font and its data for characters that
   may never be used.  That means that typesetting mathematics may
   need to operate asynchronously even if the TeX *doesn't* include
   ``\require`` or any auto-loaded extensions, as the output itself
   could need extra font data files to be loaded.  Thus in version 4,
   it is always best to use the promise-based commands, as described
   below.

The second method, :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()`, performs the
typesetting asynchronously, and returns a promise that is resolved
when the typesetting is complete.  This properly handles loading of
external files, so if you are expecting to process TeX input that can
include ``\require`` or autoloaded extensions, you should use this form
of typesetting.  Note that it can be used with ``await`` as part of a
larger ``async`` function.  If you are getting a ``retry`` error while
calling :js:meth:`MathJax.typeset()`, you should switch to using
:js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()` instead.

Each of these functions take an optional argument, which is an array of
elements whose content should be processed.  An element can be either
an actual DOM element, or a CSS selector string for one or more DOM
elements.  Supplying an array of elements will restrict the
typesetting to the contents of those elements only.

.. js:function:: MathJax.typeset([elements])

   :param (string|HTMLElement)[] elements: An optional array of DOM
                                           elements or CSS selector
                                           strings that restricts
                                           the typesetting to the
                                           contents of the specified
                                           container elements.

.. js:function:: MathJax.typesetPromise([elements])

   :param (string|HTMLElement)[] elements: An optional array of DOM
                                           elements or CSS selector
                                           strings that restricts
                                           the typesetting to the
                                           contents of the specified
                                           container elements.
   :returns Promise: A promise that resolves when the typesetting is complete.

-----

.. _typeset-async:

Handling Asynchronous Typesetting
=================================

It is not recommended to perform multiple asynchronous typesetting
calls simultaneously, as these can interfere with one another while
they are waiting for files to load.  For this reason, MathJax chains
the promises returned by the :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()`
function to make sure any previous typeset calls are complete before
starting the new one.  So if you do

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.typesetPromise(["#container1"]);
   MathJax.typesetPromise(["#container2"]);

the second typeset operation will wait for the first one to complete
before it starts.  This applies as well to the promise-based conversion
functions described in the :ref:`next section <convert-math>`, which
also use the promise chain to coordinate with other typesetting and
conversion operations.

.. warning::

   This automatic use of promises to serialize the typeset and
   conversion calls is new in version 4.  In version 3, you were
   expected to handle chaining of the typeset calls yourself, but most
   coders failed to do this, so MathJax v4 now does that for you.

   The version 3 documentation recommended using and setting
   :js:data:`MathJax.startup.promise` yourself to make sure typeset
   calls were serialized; if you included that code pattern in your v3
   work-flow, you should remove it, as it is no longer necessary.

Because :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()` returns a promise, you can
use that promise to synchronize the rest of your code with the actions
of MathJax.  For example,

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.typesetPromise().then(() => {
     for (const eqn of MathJax.startup.document.math) {
       console.log(eqn.math);
     }
   });

would typeset the math on the page and then print the original TeX
code to the console for each of the expressions on the page.

It is also possible to use the ``await`` command to wait for the
promise to be resolved.  For example

.. code-block:: javascript

   async function reportMath() {
     await MathJax.typesetPromise();
     for (const eqn of MathJax.startup.document.math) {
       console.log(eqn.math);
     }
   }

would define an asynchronous function ``reportMath()`` that typesets
the page and then reports the original TeX for each expression,
similarly to the previous code example.

As an alternative approach, it is also possible to hook into the
promise chain used by :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()` and the
promise-based conversion functions if you have actions that need to be
coordinated with MathJax's typesetting.  To do this use the command

.. js:function:: MathJax.whenReady(action)

   :param ()=>any action:
      A function to be performed when MathJax has
      finished any pending typesetting or conversion actions.
   :returns: A promise that resolves when your action has completed.

and pass it a function that does the actions you want to have
symchronized with MathJax's typesetting.  This will perform your
function when MathJax is finished with any pending typeset or
conversion actions.  It also returns a promise that resolves when your
action is complete, just like the promise-based typeset functions do.
If your action creates a promise, be sure you function returns that
promise so that :js:meth:`MathJax.whenReady()` will wait for it to
complete before its own promise is resolved.

Using this function, the previous examples could be implemented

.. code-block:: js

   MathJax.typesetPromise();
   MathJax.whenReady(() => {
     for (const eqn of MathJax.startup.document.math) {
       console.log(eqn.math);
     }
   });

The :js:meth:`MathJax.whenReady()` function is analogous to the
:meth:`MathJax.Hub.Queue()` command in v2.


-----

.. _tex-reset:

Resetting Automatic Equation Numbering
======================================

The TeX input jax allows you to automatically number equations. When
modifying a page, this can lead to problems as numbered equations may
be removed and added; most commonly, duplicate labels lead to issues.

You can reset equation numbering using the command

.. js:function:: MathJax.texReset([start])

   :param number start: An optional number at which to start the
                         equation numbering.  The default is 1.

This can be used to start the equation numbering at a particular
number, or reset it to the default starting number of 1.

-----

.. _typeset-clear:

Updating Previously Typeset Content
===================================

MathJax keeps track of all the math that it has typeset within your
page.  This is so that if you change the output renderer (using the
MathJax contextual menu), it can be changed to use the new format, for
example; or if you change the accessibility settings, say to enable
Braille output, all the math can be updated to include the Braille
strings that it generates.  If you modify the page to include new
mathematics and call :js:meth:`MathJax.typeset()` or
:js:meth:`MathJax.typesetPromise()`, the newly typeset mathematics
will be added to the list of already typeset mathematics, as you would
expect.

If you modify the page to remove content that contains typeset
mathematics, you will need to tell MathJax about that so that it knows
the typeset math that you are removing is no longer on the page.  You
do this by using the following command:

.. js:function:: MathJax.typesetClear([elements])

   :param (string|HTMLElement)[] elements:
      An optional array of DOM elements or CSS selector strings that
      restricts the typesetting to the contents of the specified
      container elements.

When called with no arguments, :meth:`MathJax.typesetClear()` tells
MathJax to forget about all the math that has been typeset so far.
Note that the math will remain in the page as typeset math, but
MathJax will no longer know anything about it.  For example, that
means that changes to the output renderer or accessibility settings
will not affect any of the math that was typeset previously.

If you remove math from only a portion of the page, you can call
:meth:`MathJax.typesetClear()` passing it an array of container
elements that will be removed, or CSS selector strings for them, and
MathJax will forget about the math that is within those containers,
while remembering the rest of the math on the page.  Note that you
should call this function **before** you change the contents of the
containers.

For example, if you have an element with ``id="has-math"`` that you
have previously typeset, and you are planning to replace the contents
of this element with new content (stored in a variable ``new_html``)
that needs to be typeset, you might use something like:

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.typesetClear([node]);
   node.innerHTML = new_html;
   MathJax.typesetPromise([node]).then(() => {
     // the new content has been typeset
   });

The argument passed to :js:meth:`MathJax.typesetClear()` can be an actual
DOM element, as in the example above, or a CSS selector string (e.g.,
``'#has-math'``), or an array of these.  The selector can specify more
than one container element (e.g., via a class selector).

If you are using automatic equation numbers and insert new content in
the middle of the page, that may require the equation numbers to be
adjusted throughout the page.  In that case, you can do

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.startup.document.state(0);
   MathJax.texReset();
   MathJax.typesetPromise();

to force MathJax to reset the page to the state it was before MathJax
processed it (i.e., remove its typeset math), reset the TeX automatic
line numbering and labels, and then re-typeset the contents of the
page from scratch.

-----

.. _get-math-items:

Looking up the Math on the Page
===============================

MathJax saves its information about a particular expression that it
has typeset in an object called a ``MathItem``; each typeset
expression has an associated MathItem.  You can look up the MathItems
using the following command:

.. js:function:: MathJax.startup.document.getMathItemsWithin(elements)

   :param (string|HTMLElement)[] elements: An array of DOM elements or
                                           CSS selector strings that
                                           restricts the typesetting
                                           to the contents of the
                                           specified container
                                           elements.
   :return MathItem[]: The list of ``MathItem`` objects for the
                       expressions within the specified containers.
   
You pass this a container element (or a CSS selector for an
element or collection of elements, or an array of containers or
selectors) and it will return an array of the MathItems that are
within those containers.  E.g.,

.. code-block:: javascript

   MathJax.startup.document.getMathItemsWithin(document.body);

will return an array of all the MathItems for the typeset math on the
page.  See the `MathItem definition
<https://github.com/mathjax/MathJax-src/blob/master/ts/core/MathItem.ts>`__
for details on the contents of the MathItem structure.  The ``MathItem``
is the replacement for the v2 ``ElementJax`` object, and
:js:meth:`MathJax.startup.document.getMathItemsWithin()` performs a
similar function to the v2 function :js:meth:`MathJax.Hub.getAllJax()`.

-----

.. _safe-typesetting:

Typesetting User-Supplied Content
=================================

Mathematics formats like LaTeX and MathML allow a powerful range of
layout options, including access to hyperlinks, CSS styles, font
selection and sizing, spacing, and so on.  Such features give you a
great deal of flexibility in producing the mathematics for your pages;
but if your readers are allowed to enter mathematics into your pages
(e.g., for a question-and-answer site, or in comments on a blog),
these features can be abused to cause problems for other readers and
pose a potential security risk to them.  For example, the TeX
``\href`` command can be used to insert ``javascript:`` links into the
page, while the ``\style`` macro could be used to disrupt the user
interface or layout of your pages.

In order to limit the potential interference that could be caused by
the mathematics entered by your readers, MathJax provides the
:ref:`safe-component` extension.  This extension filters the
mathematics on the page in order to try to remove problematic
attributes, like javascript links, or font sizes that are too large or
too small, or style settings that would be disruptive to the page
layout.  If your page allows your readers to post content that
includes mathematics processed by MathJax, you should strongly
consider using the `ui/safe` extension.

See the :ref:`safe-options` section for details of how to load and
configure the `ui/safe` extension.


|-----|
